Welcome back.
We've talked about binary trees binary search trees and then we learned about how to balance those trees
and some of the time complexities involved with a BSD and I want to talk to you about two other common
type of Treece.
One is a heap and the other one is a tri or tree in this video.
Let's get talking about sheep.
Now when it comes to a heap we're most likely going to talk about binary heaps just like we had with
binary trees.
That means there's only going to be two children to a note.
Now why are these useful and how are they different from binary trees.
Let's go have a look.
A binary tree.
Every child belongs to a parent.
Note that has a greater priority or value.
If you look over here every child that is seventy two and thirty three is lower than one in one seventy
two is higher than two and forty five and thirty three is higher than five and one this is actually
called a max heap.
There's also something called a min heap which is the exact opposite where the root node is the smallest.
Now this value can be anything you want.
It can be a person's name.
It can be a number.
It can really be anything because it's a note.
But as you can see all we're dealing with is that in a binary heap every node on the top level has a
greater value than every node on the next level down and a heap can be used in any algorithm where ordering
is important.
And as we're going to discuss it's commonly used to when it comes to priority queues.
Now with the race we had random access it allowed us to randomly access any element within them using
an index in a linked list.
We can change things dynamically unlike an array but finding something within them is all of and linear
time because we had to go through the link list here a little bit different.
You can't do all of one random access like we did with arrays are hash tables as we know about trees
we have to do some sort of traversals now compared to a binary search tree we see that.
Well look up is O.
And it's not all of log and because it's less ordered than a binary search tree right.
A binary search tree actually had meaning between left and right at the left was always less than the
right in a binary heap.
That doesn't matter.
Left and right can be any value as long as it's less than the top value.
So if we're looking for let's say one we have to check the parent node then we have to check because
one on one or because one is less than 1 to 1.
We have to check both nodes underneath it.
And then because one is less than 72 and 33 we have to once again check every single note and looking
for 1 becomes 0 of log and so pretty much turned into searching through a linked list or iterating through
an array.
So why would we ever want to use a binary heap Well it turns out that binary heaps are really really
great at doing comparative operations.
Just like saying I want people that have a value over 33 because in that case we can just grab these
items quite easily instead of going all the way down to the notes.
He actually used a lot in data storage priority queues sorting algorithms.
So let's have a look at how a binary heap is implemented visually.
We have a binary heap here using visual go.
And if we wanted to add let's say insert 26 we hit go all right.
That was really fast.
But what if we wanted to insert let's say 51
financer 51.
I had to do a bit of a switch to see heaps add value on the tree in order from left to right and then
bubbles up.
If it's not in the same order or the priority order that is once kind of like we did here.
So if I add let's say 70 or you know what.
Let's add a hundred.
What do you think will happen.
Well if I hit go you'll see I add a hundred and then it bubbles up.
So as you can see inserts although it looks fast can still take log and
and this is the same case with deletes as well.
It's all of log.
And now in order to truly understand why we need something like a binary heap why they're so useful.
How they're different from binary search tree.
We need to talk about priority queues.
So let's talk about priority queues.